User guide first draft (#9)
pyscript/docs: docs/user-guide.md

[instruction set](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instruction_set_architecture)
for a [virtual machine](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_machine) with
an open specification and near native performance. PyScript takes
versions of the Python interpreter compiled to WASM, and makes them easy to use
inside the browser.

At the core of PyScript is a _philosophy of digital empowerment_. The web is
the world's most ubiquitous computing platform, mature and familiar to billions
of people. Python is one of the
[world's most popular programming languages](https://spectrum.ieee.org/the-top-programming-languages-2023):
it is easy to teach and learn, used in a plethora of existing domains
(such as data science, games, embedded systems, artificial intelligence,
finance, physics  and film production - to name but a few), and the Python
ecosystem contains a huge number of popular and powerful libraries to address
its many uses.

PyScript brings together the ubiquity, familiarity and accessibility of the web
with the power, depth and expressiveness of Python. It means PyScript isn't
just for programming experts but, as we like to say, for the 99% of the rest of
the planet who use computers.

> 

Reviewer: is this blurb actually needed in a "User Guide"?
I suspect that people coming to read the user guide are already convinced to use pyscript.
Maybe it should to into an `Overview` or `Motivation` page?
(no need to split it now, we can do it later)

Author: Yes it does... (Fabio and I discussed this and the "features" section too). Folks will be directly linked to this page as the user guide... so likely miss the intro blurb.

## Features

<dl>
    <dt><em>All the web</em></dt>
    <dd>
    <p>Pyscript gives you <a href="#the-dom">full access to the DOM</a> and all
    the <a href="https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API">web
    APIs implemented by your browser</a>.</p>

    <p>Thanks to the <a href="#ffi">foreign
    function interface</a> (FFI), it is easy for Python to work within your
    browser, including with third party JavaScript libraries that may be
    included in the page.</p>

    <p>The FFI is bi-directional ~ it also enables JavaScript to access the

>     power of PyScript.</p></dd>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    power of Python.</p></dd>
```

maybe?

Author: I need to check it works properly in MicroPython. ;-)

    <dt><em>All of Python</em></dt>
    <dd>
    <p>PyScript brings you two Python interpreters:</p>
    <ol>
        <li><a href="https://pyodide.org/">Pyodide</a> - the original standard

>         CPython interpreter you know and love, but compiled to web
>         assembly.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        CPython interpreter you know and love, but compiled to WebAssembly.
        </li>
```

        <li><a href="https://micropython.org/">MicroPython</a> - a lean and
        efficient reimplementation of Python3 that includes a comprehensive

>         subset of the standard library, compiled to web assembly.</li>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        subset of the standard library, compiled to WebAssembly.</li>
```

ok, I'll stop with these suggestions now, but please do a global search&replace :)

    </ol>
    <div class="admonition warning">
        <p class="admonition-title">Warning</p>

>         <p>Currently, only Pyodide is enabled in PyScript.</p>

Reviewer: this is no longer true?

Author: It was at time of writing. :-)

    <p>This approach means we get a clear separation of concerns: PolyScript
    can focus on being small, efficient and powerful, whereas the PyScript
    related plugins allow us to build upon the generic features provided by
    PolyScript.</p>
    <p>More importantly, because there is a plugin system, folks
    <em>independent of the PyScript core team</em> have a way to create their
    own plugins so we get a rich ecosystem of functionality that reflects the
    unique and diverse needs of PyScript's users.</p>
    </dd>
</dl>

## First steps

It's simple:

* tell your browser to use PyScript, then,
* tell PyScript how to run your Python code.

For the browser to use PyScript, simply add a `<script>` tag, whose `src`
attribute references a CDN url for `pyscript.core`, to your HTML document's
`<head>`. You may also add a reference to optional PyScript related CSS:

**TODO: USE CORRECT CDN URL**:

```html title="Reference PyScript in your HTML"
<!doctype html>
<html>
    <head>
        <!-- Recommended meta tags -->
        <meta charset="UTF-8">
        <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width,initial-scale=1.0">

>         <!-- optional PyScript CSS -->

Reviewer: I would remove `optional`. Better to teach people to always include it

Author: There have been many times when I've not needed the `pyscript.css` and used something else instead.

Reviewer: yes, but the current `pyscript.css` is very minimal:
https://github.com/pyscript/pyscript/blob/a0bc4006cdd3eeb81a55460fb66dc089f5e08f90/pyscript.core/src/core.css#L1-L6

basically, it is needed to avoid FOUC, especially if you use `<py-script>` or `<py-config>`.
It is "optional" in the sense that your app still works without, but there is no good reason for teaching people not to use it, IMHO.

/cc @WebReflection since he cares a lot about FOUC :)

        <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@pyscript/core/dist/core.css">
        <!-- This script tag bootstraps PyScript -->
        <script type="module" src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@pyscript/core"></script>
    </head>
    <body>
        <!-- your code goes here... -->
    </body>
</html>
```

There are two ways to tell PyScript how to find your code.

* With a standard HTML `<script>` tag whose `type` attribute is either `py`
  (for Pyodide) or `mpy` (for MicroPython). **This is currently the
  recommended way**.
* Via the bespoke `<py-script>` (Pyodide) and `<mpy-script>` (MicroPython)

>   tags. Historically, this used to be the only way to reference your code.

Reviewer: is this a guide for "new pyscripters" or for "people migrating from old versions"?
It seems we are tying to do both here, but maybe it would be better to just have two separate docs for two separate audiences?

These should be inserted into the `<body>` of your HTML document.

In both cases either use the `src` attribute to reference a Python
file containing your code, or inline your code between the opening and closing

> tags. **We recommend you use the `src` attribute method**, but retain the

Author: Yes we do. You're editing a Python file, rather than editing an HTML with Python in it (without the code highlighting). I'm sure you and I have talked about this many times before.

ability to include code between tags for convenience.

Here's the `<script>` tag method using the `src` attribute to reference the URL
for a `main.py` Python file.

```html title="Using the script tag with a source file"

> <script type="mpy" src="main.py"></script>

Author: I'm torn, I want folks to test it! :-)

> <script type="mpy" src="main.py"></script>

Reviewer: they should test if it they want, not because they are tricked by the documentation

```

...and here's the `<py-script>` tag with inline Python code.

```html title="Using the py-script tag with inline code"
<py-script>
import sys
from pyscript import display

display(sys.version)
</py-script>
```

The browser's tab displaying the website running PyScript is an isolated
computing sandbox. Define the Python environment in which your code will
run with [configuration options](#configuration) (discussed later in this
document).

> The `<script>` and `<py-script>` / `<mpy-script>` tags can have the following

Author: But this specific section talks about attributes of all these tags. (Although I agree with you)

attributes:

* `src` - the content of the tag is ignored and the Python code in the
  referenced file is evaluated instead. **This is the recommended way to
  reference your Python code.**
* `config` - your code will only be evaluated after the referenced
  configuration has been parsed. Since configuration can be JSON (or a TOML
  file), `config='{"packages":["numpy"]}'` and `config="./config.json"` or
  `config="./config.toml"` are all valid.
* `async` - your Python code is run asynchronously (awaited), rather than in a

>   blocking manner.

Reviewer: I don't think it's true.
What it does is to allow `top level await`, but the code is still sync.
Yes, I think it's a wrong name :man_shrugging:

Author: OK... let's figure out a better / more accurate way to put this next week. It's now on my todo list.

* `worker` - a flag to indicate your Python code is to be run on a web worker
  instead of the "main thread" that looks after the user interface.

!!! tip 

    If you want to run code on both the main thread and in a worker, be
    explicit and use separate tags.

    ```html
    <script type="mpy" src="main.py"></script>  <!-- on the main thread -->
    <script type="py" src="worker.py" worker config="pyconfig.toml"></script> <!-- on the worker -->
    ```

    Notice how different interpreters can be used in different contexts.

## Architecture

There are two important aspects of PyScript's architecture:

1. A small, efficient and powerful kernel called
   [PolyScript](https://github.com/pyscript/polyscript) is the foundation
   upon which PyScript and plugins are built.
2. The PyScript [stack](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solution_stack) inside
   the browser is relatively simple and easy to understand.

### PolyScript

[PolyScript](https://github.com/pyscript/polyscript) is the core of PyScript.

!!! info

    Unless you are an advanced user, you probably don't need to know much more
    than PolyScript exists, and it can be safely ignored.

> 

Reviewer: are we sure we want to talk about PolyScript in this guide?
It's a very advanced topic, and I expect that 99% of our users will never need to know about it

Author: That's the point. I talk about it to tell folks, "you probably don't need to know about it" and then, as a courtesy, provide the bare minimum pointers for those few who do need to explore. :+1:

Reviewer: Then I would put it at the end, in a section called "Advanced stuff that you don't need to know", or something like that.
+1 for adding a better explanation of the internal, but -0.5 to put it so early in the document, since most people are not interested in knowing about polyscript

    * **PyScript only runs IN THE BROWSER (and nowhere else).**

* At the bottom of the stack are the Python interpreters compiled to WASM. They
  evaluate your code and interact with the browser via the [FFI](#ffi).
* The PyScript layer makes it easy to use and configure the Python
  interpreters. There are two parts to this:
    1. The PolyScript kernel (see above), that bootstraps everything and
       provides the core capabilities.
    2. PyScript and related plugins that sit atop PolyScript to give us an
       easy-to-use Python platform _in the browser_.
* Above the PyScript layer are either:
    1. Application frameworks, modules and libraries written in Python that you
       use to create useful applications.
    2. Your code (that's your responsibility).

## Lifecycle

If the architecture explains how components relate to each other, the lifecycle
explains how things unfold. It's important to understand both: it will
help you think about your own code and how it sits within PyScript.

Here's how PyScript unfolds through time:

* The browser is directed to a URL. The response is HTML.
* As part of parsing the HTML response the browser encounters the `<script>`

>   tag that references PyScript. PyScript is loaded and evaluated as a module,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  tag that references PyScript. PyScript is loaded and evaluated as a JS module,
```

although probably the most correct technical term is `ES Module` (for EcmaScript Module, I think?).
Probably @WebReflection knows better

Author: "JavaScript" module..?

(`stdin`, `stdout`, `stderr` etc,) and
[networking](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/fetch.html) are
available within the context of a browser.

Both Pyodide and MicroPython implement the same robust
[Python](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/api/python-api.html)
⟺ [JavaScript](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/api/js-api.html)
[foreign function interface](#ffi) (FFI). This
bridges the gap between the browser and Python worlds.

### Pyodide

<a href="https://pyodide.org/"><img src="../assets/images/pyodide.png"/></a>

[Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/) is a version of the standard
[CPython](https://python.org/) interpreter, patched to compile to WASM and
work in the browser.

It includes many useful features:

* The installation of pure Python packages from [PyPI](https://pypi.org/) via
  the [micropip](https://micropip.pyodide.org/en/stable/index.html) package
  installer. Some packages with C extensions have versions compiled for WASM
  and these can also be installed with `micropip`. There are plans afoot to
  make WASM a target in PyPI so packages with C extenions can be automatically

>   compiled to WASM.

Reviewer: if you don't understand what are pure python packages and C extension, it is probably not very easy to understand what this paragraph means in practice.
It's probably worth its own section

Author: Sure, we do point out that we expect not-beginner-level readers of this guide. Suggestions for a good article to which we can point folks who want to know more are most welcome. :+1:

Reviewer: from my experience of talking about C extensions, PyPy, HPy, etc. at conferences, there is a huge number of "non beginners" who don't know anything about C extensions, and that have no idea of what is a "pure python" wheel.

A quick fix is to link to this pyodide's FAQ:
https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/faq.html#why-can-t-micropip-find-a-pure-python-wheel-for-a-package

A more proper fix is to write a dedicated section to explain it

over the network. The smaller the asset to be delivered can be, the better.
MicroPython, when compressed for delivery to the browser, is only around
170k in size - smaller than many images found on the web.

This makes MicroPython particularly suited to browsers running in a more
constrained environment such as on a mobile or tablet based device. Browsing
with these devices usually uses (slower) mobile internet connections.
Furthermore, because MicroPython is lean and efficient it still performs
exceptionally well on these relatively underpowered devices.

Thanks to collaboration between the MicroPython and PyScript projects, there is
a foreign function interface for MicroPython. The MicroPython FFI deliberately
copies the API of the FFI originally written for Pyodide - meaning it is
relatively easy to migrate between the two supported interpreters.

## Configuration

Because PyScript is a browser based technology, the tab in which the web page
is displayed is a very secure sandboxed computing environment for running your
Python code. Think of it as similar to the notion of a
[virtual environment](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html)

> in the Python world.

Reviewer: this is just wrong. Virtualenvs are not secure nor sandboxd

Author: > Think of it as similar to the notion of...

In English, this is saying they're like each other, but not the same. That's literally what "similar" means. :-D

Author: Although I agree we should tell folks venvs are not secure or sandboxed.

Reviewer: as a non-native speaker, what I understand is that virtualenvs are sandboxed :)
So, since we are talking about security, better to play safe and rewrite the sentence in a less ambiguous way :)

Author: I've just removed this since it's not really needed and will only cause confusion. :smile:

to express your configuration needs.

**TODO: explain how to programmatically get access to an object representing
the config.**

## The DOM

The DOM
([document object model](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Document_object_model))
refers to a tree like data structure that represents the web page in the
browser. PyScript needs to be able to interact with the DOM in order to change
the user interface and react to things happening in the browser.

There are currently two ways to interact with the DOM:

1. Through the foreign function interface (FFI) and by directly interacting
   with the objects found in the browser's `globalThis` object.
2. Through the `pydom` module that comes as standard with PyScript.

### FFI

The foreign function interface (FFI) gives Python access to all the
[standard web capabilities and features](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web),
such as the browser's built-in
[web APIs](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API).

This is available via the `pyscript.window` module which is a proxy for
JavaScript's `globalThis` object, or `pyscript.document` which is a proxy for
the `document` object in JavaScript:

> 

Reviewer: this is not true in workers.
`import js` is always a `globalThis` in both cases.
In workers, `pyscript.window` is a proxy to the main thread window

Author: Good catch. Let me change this.
